In our project folder here, I first of all want to draw your attention to the script which starts our development
server.
Now this is only the development server here,
you won't use that for production, here
however I added this -c-1 flag,
what this will do on the HTTP server package is, it will ensure that we don't cache any assets using the
normal browser cache.
Now you will learn later in the course that there are two types of caches,
one cache which can be used by the service worker and the default browser cache
and I don't want to use the default browser cache to make sure that all changes we put into place here
are immediately reflected in the browser.
Now for production, this is not necessarily required because you don't change your files every second.
Now with that out of the way, make sure that your server is running by opening the terminal,
this is simply a terminal integrated into my IDE and running npm start,
this will then execute the start script then start our server with that
please don't cache anything policy, now I'll close the terminal here simply to have more space.
Now with that of course, we want to create a new service worker
and as I told you, a service worker actually is a Javascript file.
Now you could be inclined to add it to /src/js because that is where the other Javascript files
sit,
however do you remember that scope thing I mentioned? That you can define the scope of a service worker
and which kind of pages it can actually react to events and control? Well the scope by default always is
the folder the service worker sits in,
so if we add it to the Javascript folder, the service worker will only apply to pages inside that folder.
Now clearly, we don't have any in there
and the Javascript files here are of course no pages,
these are Javascript file,
I'm talking about HTML pages. So the Javascript folder is the wrong place to add the service worker,
instead we typically add it in your root web folder, so the folder which gets served by your server,
in our case the public folder.
Then you ensure that the service worker applies to all pages in your application
no matter in which sub-folder or root folder they sit.
If you were to add it in the help folder, the service worker could control the index.html file there but
not the index.html file in the public folder.
Sometimes you want that behavior, you only want to control certain parts of your application with a service
worker,
sometimes you don't want that,
so I will add it in the public folder to be able to use it everywhere in the application.
There, I simply create a new file and you can give this file any name you want,
I'll name it sw.js,
obviously for service worker,
of course you could also as I just said name it differently. So that's the service worker file being
added to the public folder, to our root web folder where our application is getting served from.
Before I put any code inside of the service worker, I wanna register it.
Now how do we register the service worker?
As I said, you do this in your normal Javascript code.
You could add this code to the index.html file with some inline code
here between script tags, you could do that and then you would have to do it in every page
though, every page, HTML page, because and that's another important thing,
you want to register the service worker in every page of your application because you don't know which page
the user is going to visit. Once you registered it,
it won't be replaced easily or quickly unless you have a new version of the service worker but you need
to be able to register it from anywhere because otherwise, you need to bet on the user visiting a specific
page of your app.
So a nice place to add the registration code would be the app.js file because I'm importing this
both in the index.html
in the root folder and in the index.html file in the help folder,
so I'll add the registration code to the app.js file here. In there,
I first of all want to check if the service worker feature is available in the browser
the user visiting this web page uses
because as with all the features you learned in this course, progressive web apps are about progressively
enhancing web apps and therefore, we can't bet on service workers being available.
It would be nice if we could use them,
it's a big enhancement of the web application but if they aren't, there's nothing we can do,
all we can do is we can at least check for the existence to not execute code which won't work.
So I'll add an if statement and there
I want to check if serviceWorker and make sure you get the casing correct, capital W but a lower case
s at the beginning,
if serviceWorker in navigator. Navigator simply is your browser and the in keyword allows you to check
if a property, this property exists in this object,
so in the browser. That means that the code inside the if statement will only execute if the browser of
the user visiting the page has the service worker object which means it supports imports service workers,
otherwise this code will just not execute
and we don't add any service workers because it's not supported
but the app will still work, just without service workers.
Now since we know that service workers are available, we can execute navigator.serviceWorker,
the casing is the same as the property we checked here because now we are accessing that property
and on that property, you can call register and even though I added it in a new line, it still applies
to this expression here,
I'm just putting it in a new line to make it easier to read.
So here, we register a new service worker,
now we have to define the path pointing to the service worker
and that will be /sw.js, slash to make sure we always go to the root folder first and then
well, this is the file name, sw.js.
This will tell the browser, browsers that support the service worker feature that this file should be
treated in a special way and should be registered as a service worker, as a background process so to
say. Register actually returns a promise and I'll dive deeper into promises in the next course module,
for now you can know that this is simply a feature allowing us to work with asynchronous code and register
is an asynchronous action which means it doesn't instantly or immediately finish, this registration process
takes some time.
So in order to get informed once it is done, we can chain
then after it, this is a promise feature and the function we passed to then will simply be executed once
the promise is done,
so once the registration is done. This ensures that this is not blocking our work,
so if I add more code after this if statement here, it will immediately execute because the registration
won't block the single thread
and again more on this in the next course module.
Now here in then, I can simply say console log service worker registered, like that. With that,
we now have a code which should inform us once the service worker is registered,
let's go back to our application then and make sure that the web development server is running,
I just restarted it in a few seconds ago.
Once we reloaded the web application, I just did this,
I do it again,
you see service worker registered here in the console, which is great,
it means that then block got executed.
You'll also see that if you visit application here and you click on service worker, you get some information
about the service worker here.
This is your scope here
since we place the service worker file in our public directory, it's the entire domain,
here you see that it is activated and running
and here you see the name, you can click on it to view the file content which of course is empty right
now.
Now these buttons here allow you to quickly update it to a new version if you've got one, simulate a
push event,
we'll come back to this later,
simulate a background synchronization event,
we'll come back to this too later or unregister it if you want to get rid,
these are all debugging development only tools,
you can't rely on using them in a production ready application
of course. The checkboxes up here allow you to simulate offline mode,
we'll do this in the future. To automatically update the service worker whenever you refresh the page,
I'll come back to what I mean with that soon, to not use the service worker in case you're intercepting
requests with fetch,
we don't do this yet but we will later do it.
If you wanted to disable it temporarily, you could check this and to show all service workers you have,
so not just the ones relating to the page we currently have open here. This is the service worker registered
and here you see that you want to terminate it because it's not doing anything but dev tools prevented
it from doing so,
doesn't really matter to us here,
this is the important line.
Let's next see how we can use the install and activate event and what we can actually do with the service
worker.